D1. Creating a new C++ Module
#############################

This tutorial contains short instructions on how to set up a new C++ module
for Syntalos.

1. Building Syntalos
====================

The easiest way to add a new C++ module is to build it with Syntalos itself, as building it
out-of-tree is not very well tested yet.

Follow the instructions to build Syntalos from source in :doc:`the Syntalos installation instructions </install>`.
You can also open the Syntalos sources in `QtCreator <https://www.qt.io/product/development-tools>`_ or any C/C++
IDE you prefer.

Quick build instructions for Debian/Ubuntu:

.. code-block:: bash

    sudo apt install \
        git ca-certificates \
        xvfb xauth \
        python3-pip \
        cmake \
        gettext \
        libaravis-dev \
        libavcodec-dev \
        libavformat-dev \
        libavutil-dev \
        libegl-dev \
        libeigen3-dev \
        libglib2.0-dev \
        libgstreamer1.0-dev \
        libgstreamer-plugins-base1.0-dev \
        libkf5archive-dev \
        libkf5texteditor-dev \
        libopencv-dev \
        libpipewire-0.3-dev \
        libqt5opengl5-dev \
        libqt5remoteobjects5-bin \
        libqt5remoteobjects5-dev \
        libqt5serialport5-dev \
        libqt5svg5-dev \
        libswscale-dev \
        libsystemd-dev \
        libusb-1.0-0-dev \
        libv4l-dev \
        libxml2-dev \
        libxxhash-dev \
        meson \
        ninja-build \
        ocl-icd-opencl-dev \
        pybind11-dev \
        python3-dev \
        python3-numpy \
        qtbase5-dev \
        qtmultimedia5-dev \
        udev \
        uuid-dev
    mkdir build && cd build
    meson ..
    ninja
    sudo ninja install

Once you can build Syntalos, you can set up your new C++ module. Do not hesitate to ask questions in case you run into any issues
and file an issue or ask in `Discussions on GitHub <https://github.com/bothlab/syntalos/discussions>`_.

2. Copy a Template
==================

The easiest way to start building a new module is to copy a template.
A minimal C++ module exists in the form of `example-cpp <https://github.com/bothlab/syntalos/tree/master/modules/example-cpp>`_.
Copy its directory and rename it to your chosen ID name.
A module ID name must be unique and can not be changed once it is chosen, because otherwise existing configurations would break.
It uniquely identifies your module, and may only contain alphanumeric characters, dashes and underscores.


3. Adjust Metadata
==================

Rename the C++ files if you want to and adjust any naming in ``meson.build``. Also, ensure your new module directory
is included in a ``subdir()`` directive in the toplevel
`modules/meson.build <https://github.com/bothlab/syntalos/blob/master/modules/meson.build>`_ file.

Then, open the ``examplemodule.cpp`` file (or what it was renamed to) and scroll to the bottom.
You will find these lines, implementing virtual methods of a ``ModuleInfo`` class:

.. code-block:: cpp

    QString ExampleCppModuleInfo::id() const
    {
        return QStringLiteral("example-cpp");
    }

    QString ExampleCppModuleInfo::name() const
    {
        return QStringLiteral("C++ Module Example");
    }

    QString ExampleCppModuleInfo::description() const
    {
        return QStringLiteral("Most basic module, a starting place to develop a new C++ module.");
    }

    bool ExampleCppModuleInfo::devel() const
    {
        return true;
    }

    AbstractModule *ExampleCppModuleInfo::createModule(QObject *parent)
    {
        return new ExampleCppModule(parent);
    }

By removing the ``ExampleCppModuleInfo::devel()`` function, you can declare your module as proper module and not just development-aid.
Adjust all other values accordingly as well to give your module a nice, human-readable name and description.
The module icon is automatically picked up from an SVG file of the same name as your module in the module directory.
Alternatively, it can also be generated by C++ code.

The most important method of a ``ModuleInfo`` is the ``createModule(QObject *parent)`` method.
It is invoked when your module is added to a workspace and creates a new instance of your own module class that inherits
from ``ÀbstractModule``, in this case ``ExampleCppModule`` defined above.

4. Write your code
==================

You will find these lines in the constructor of your new module class:

.. code-block:: cpp
    m_frameIn = registerInputPort<Frame>(QStringLiteral("frames-in"), QStringLiteral("Frames In"));
    m_frameOut = registerOutputPort<Frame>(QStringLiteral("frames-out"), QStringLiteral("Frames Out"));

These register the ports that this module supports. The template argument is the type a port accepts/emits, followed by its unique name
and human-redable name as parameters. The ``register(In|Out)putPort`` will return a refernce to the port that you can use later.

Refer to :doc:`the AbstractModule API documentation </api/classSyntalos_1_1AbstractModule>` for more information on the methods you
can implement to add features to your module.
Most usable API for modules can be found in :doc:`the moduleapi.h header </api/file_moduleapi.h>`, and is documented there.

The example C++ module also has some inline comments, explaining the purpose of certain functions.
If you get stuck while developing a module, do not hesitate to `ask for help <https://github.com/bothlab/syntalos/discussions>`_.

`TODO: Add more explanations.`


5. Test
=======

Once you recompile Syntalos and run it, your module should automatically show up in the module selection dialog.
Once your module addition is ready, we would be happy to merge it into the main Syntalos tree and release it with
Syntalos for ease of future use and to make maintenance of new modules easier.
